Termination algorithm for impl selection (#2687)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p2687.md

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/2687)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Abstract](#abstract)
-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
    -   [Non-type arguments](#non-type-arguments)
    -   [Proof of termination](#proof-of-termination)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Measure complexity using type tree depth](#measure-complexity-using-type-tree-depth)
    -   [Consider each type parameter in an `impl` declaration separately](#consider-each-type-parameter-in-an-impl-declaration-separately)
    -   [Consider types in the interface being implemented as distinct](#consider-types-in-the-interface-being-implemented-as-distinct)
    -   [Require some count to decrease](#require-some-count-to-decrease)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

This proposal replaces the termination algorithm for `impl` selection. The

> previous algorithm relied a recursion limit, which is counter to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
previous algorithm relied on a recursion limit, which is counter to
```

[our goal for predictability](/docs/design/generics/goals.md#predictability).

The replacement is to terminate if any `impl` declaration depends transitively

> on itself with a "strict superset" type as one of its parameters.

Reviewer: This sounds like it's a static property of the `impl` declaration itself, rather than a property of a particular query. I wonder if something like, "terminate if any `impl` lookup performed while considering an `impl` declaration depends transitively on the same `impl` declaration with a "strict superset" type as one of its parameters" would be clearer. But I guess there's a limit on how precise we should be in the Abstract.

Author: I made your changes, plus some others since this was written before some changes in approach.

query must never get strictly more complicated. The way we measure the
complexity of a set of types is by counting how many of each base type appears.
A base type is the name of a type without its parameters. For example, the base
types in this query `Pair(Optional(i32), bool) impls AddWith(Optional(i32))`
are:

-   `Pair`
-   `Optional` twice
-   `i32` twice
-   `bool`
-   `AddWith`

A query is strictly more complicated if at least one count increases, and no
count decreases. So `Optional(Optional(i32))` is strictly more complicated than
`Optional(i32)` but not strictly more complicated than `Optional(bool)`.

This rule, when combined with
[the acyclic rule](/docs/design/generics/details.md#acyclic-rule) that a query
can't repeat exactly, [guarantees termination](#proof-of-termination). This rule
is expected to identify a problematic sequence of `impl` declaration
instantiations in a way that is easier for the user to understand. Consider the
example from before,

```
interface I;
impl forall [T:! type where Optional(.Self) is I] T as I;
```

This `impl` declaration matches the query `i32 impls I` as long as

> `Optional(i32) impls I`. That is a strictly more complicated query, though,

Reviewer: One minor detail here: we should only report an error if we cycle back to considering the same `impl` declaration again. I think we wanted the type structure ordering / `match_first` ordering to apply before we detect cycles, so that we accept:

```
impl forall [T:! type where Optional(.Self) is I] T as I;
impl Optional(i32) as I;
// OK, because we never consider the first `impl` when looking for `Optional(i32) impls I`.
let T:! I = i32;
// error, cycle
let U:! I = f32;
```

Author: Added some text above and below.

since it contains all the base types of the starting query (`i32` and `I`), plus
one more (`Optional`). As a result, an error can be given after one step, rather
than after hitting a large recursion limit. And that error can state explicitly
what went wrong: we went from a query with no `Optional` to one with one,
without anything else decreasing.

It is robust in the face of refactoring:

-   It does not depend on the specifics of how an `impl` declaration is
    parameterized, only on the query.
-   It does not depend on the length of the chain of queries.
-   It does not depend on a measure of type-expression complexity, like depth.

## Details

### Non-type arguments

For non-type arguments we have to expand beyond base types to consider other
kinds of keys. These other keys are in a separate namespace from base types.

-   Values with an integral type use a key with the name of the type and the

>     absolute value as a count. This means integer arguments are considered more

Reviewer: I misparsed this sentence; I think a comma after "name of the type" would have helped me not read this as "a key with (the name of the type and the absolute value) as a count". Or, "use the name of the type as the key and the absolute value as the count"?

Author: Did the second.

    `2` and `-3` are used as arguments to parameters with type `i32`, then the
    `i32` key will have count `5`.
-   Every option of a choice type is its own key, counting how many times a
    value using that option occurs. Any parameters to the option are recorded as
    separate keys. For example, the `Optional(i32)` value of `.Some(7)` is
    recorded as keys `.Some` (with a count of `1`) and `i32` (with a count of
    `7`).
-   Yet another namespace of keys is used to track counts of variadic arguments,
    under the base type. This is to defend against having a variadic type `V`
    that takes any number of `i32` arguments, with an infinite set of distinct
    instantiations: `V(0)`, `V(0, 0)`, `V(0, 0, 0)`, ...
    -   A `tuple` key in this namespace is used to track the total number of
        components of tuple values. The values of those elements will be tracked
        using their own keys.

Non-type argument values not covered by these cases must not change. That is to
say, if the 3rd argument to a type constructor `V(...)` is `"foo"`, in one
query, then it should be the same in every dependent query that includes

> `V(...)`.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how to apply this rule in the case where the 3rd argument to `V(...)` doesn't exist in the other query at all (because either the `V(...)` is gone or is now in a different place).

I think that, after considering the rest of the rules, we have one of a small number of cases:

1) Some key decreases: the new query is less complex, and is acceptable.
2) No key decreases and some key increases: the new query is more complex, and is rejected.
3) No key decreases or increases, and the query is identical to the one we had before: the new query is a repeat of the earlier one, and is rejected.
4) No key decreases or increases, and the query is not identical to the one we had before: there are only finitely many orderings of the keys, so we accept.

I think what we're looking for here might be, for the "identical to the one we had before" comparison, we completely ignore non-type argument values other than the ones for which we have special-case handling. Put another way, we delete all non-type arguments with no special handling from the query entirely before applying this algorithm.

Author: That is a simpler rule, thanks. How is my new text?

Author: Oh, I just realized I need to add this as an alternative considered. I'll do that after the meeting.

Author: Sorry for the delay. This alternative has now been recorded.

### Proof of termination

Let's call a (finite or infinite) sequence of type expressions "good" if no
later element is strictly more complex than an earlier element, and no type
expression is repeated. We would like to prove that any good sequence of type
expressions with a finite set of keys is finite.

We can restrict to good sequences that don't repeat any multiset of keys, since

> there are only a finite number of types with a given multiset of keys Proof: If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there are only a finite number of types with a given multiset of keys. Proof: If
```

none of the types have a variadic parameter list, then there is at most one type
for every distinct permutation of base types. If some types are variadic, then
we can get a conservative finite upper bound by multiplying the number of
distinct permutations by the number of different possible arity combinations.
The number of arity combinations is finite since, ignoring non-type arguments,
the total arity must equal the number of base types in the type minus 1.

The proof of termination is by induction on the number `N` of distinct keys.

-   If `N == 1`, then types map to a multiset of a single key, which can be
    represented by the count of the number of times that key appears. That
    number must be non-negative and decreasing in the sequence, and so the
    length of the sequence is bounded by the value of the first element. So good
    sequences with `N == 1` must be finite.
-   Assuming that good sequences with `N` distinct keys must be finite, consider
    a good sequence with `N+1` distinct keys. Its first element will be
    represented by a non-negative integer `(N+1)`-tuple, `(i_0, i_1, ..., i_N)`.

>     Every element after that will either be in one of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Every element after that will be in at least one of the
```

[issue #2458: Infinite recursion during impl selection](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/2458).

## Rationale

This proposal advances these [Carbon goals](/docs/project/goals.md):

-   [Language tools and ecosystem](/docs/project/goals.md#language-tools-and-ecosystem)
    by improving the quality of diagnostics.
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
    since we've chosen alternatives that avoid introducing failures as the
    result of refactorings, particularly those outside the files changed in the
    refactoring.
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
    by having a relatively simple language rule, that is predictable when
    authoring code, and allows independent modules to compose without triggering
    errors.

## Alternatives considered

### Measure complexity using type tree depth

We
[considered](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/2458#issuecomment-1371412985)
a rule which would ensure termination by forbidding the depth of the type tree

> in the query. This depth could either be measured in the query or in the values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the query from increasing. This depth could either be measured in the query or in the values
```

considered measuring the complexity of the argument values of parameters in an
individual `impl` declaration. The advantage of this would be fewer spurious
failures due to the termination rule.

We decided against it because it is a more complex rule and it is sensitive to
the specifics of how `impl` declarations are parameterized. This raises concerns
about refactorings introducing termination rule failures. We did not want to
incorporate this change without evidence that those spurious failures would be a
problem in practice.

### Consider types in the interface being implemented as distinct

Instead of measuring the complexity of the entire `impl` query together, we
could consider keys in the type and interface parts of the query to be in
distinct namespaces. This would reduce the spurious failuers due to the
termination rule, but not as much as the previous alternative. It avoids the
problem of the previous alternative, since it is not sensitive to the specifics
of how `impl` declarations are parameterized.

We are not choosing this alternative now since it is a more complicated rule to
explain. But we would consider this alternative in the future if we find it

> beneficial in pract to support the additional cases this rule permits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
beneficial in practice to support the additional cases this rule permits.
```

    -   [Require some count to decrease](#require-some-count-to-decrease)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

This proposal replaces the termination algorithm for `impl` selection. The
previous algorithm relied on a recursion limit, which is counter to
[our goal for predictability](/docs/design/generics/goals.md#predictability).

The replacement is to terminate if any `impl` lookup performed while considering
an `impl` declaration depends transitively on the same `impl` declaration with a
"strict superset" of the types in the query.

## Problem

Consider this `impl` declaration:

```
interface I;
impl forall [T:! type where Optional(.Self) is I] T as I;
```

A type like `i32` is a valid value of `T`, and so implements `I`, if
`Optional(i32)` implements `I`. This `impl` declaration could also possibly be
used to give an implementation of `Optional(i32)` for interface `I`, but only if
there was an implementation of `Optional(Optional(i32))` for interface `I`. The
job of the termination rule is to report an error instead of being caught in an
infinite loop in this situation.

> Ideally, a termination rule would identify the loop in a minimal way. This has a
> few benefits, including reducing compile times and making error messages as
> short and understandable as they can be. One downside of the original recursion
> limit rule is its tendency to only detect a problem after the loop had been
> repeated many times. This is made worse if the recursion limit is large.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ideally, a termination rule would identify the loop in a minimal way. This has a
few benefits, including reducing compile times and making error messages as
short and understandable as possible. One downside of the original recursion
limit rule is its tendency to only detect a problem after the loop had been
started. This becomes worse if the recursion limit is large.
```

Author: I'm going to undo the "repeated many times" -> "started" edit since it changes the meaning in a way that misses the point I was trying to make.

```

This `impl` declaration matches the query `i32 impls I` as long as
`Optional(i32) impls I`. That is a strictly more complicated query, though,
since it contains all the base types of the starting query (`i32` and `I`), plus
one more (`Optional`). As a result, an error can be given after one step, rather
than after hitting a large recursion limit. And that error can state explicitly
what went wrong: we went from a query with no `Optional` to one with one,
without anything else decreasing.

Note this only triggers a failure when the same `impl` declaration is considered
with the strictly more complicated query. For example, if the declaration is not
considered since there is a more specialized `impl` declaration that is
preferred by the
[type-structure overlap rule](/docs/design/generics/details.md#overlap-rule), as
in:

```
impl forall [T:! type where Optional(.Self) is I] T as I;
impl Optional(bool) as I;

// OK, because we never consider the first `impl`
// declaration when looking for `Optional(bool) impls I`.
let U:! I = bool;

// Error: cycle with `i32 impls I` depending on
// `Optional(i32) impls I`, using the same `impl`
// declaration, as before.
let V:! I = i32;
```

> It is robust in the face of refactoring:

Reviewer 3: "It" is a bit ambiguous for me with the prior example. Maybe:

```suggestion
The rule is also robust in the face of refactoring:
```
